Create post mortem post for 03.08.23 (#420)
openSUSE/obs-landing: _posts/deployments/2023-08-03-post-mortem.md

## Downtime on the afternoon of 3rd of August

On 3. August, a few hours after a large migration performed within the maintenance window earlier that day, we got notified about database errors coming from some of the tables.

**Date**: 03.08.2023 

**Impact**: Broken indexes on `project_log_entries`, `binary_releases`, `bs_request_actions` and `tokens` tables

**Root Causes**: Database cluster VM run out of available space. Generation of table indexes did not work

> **Trigger**: Morning deployment and migration from utf8mb3 to utf8mb4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Trigger**: Morning deployment and migration from utf8mb3 to utf8mb4.
```

> **Resolution**: The tables were dumped and restored from scratch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Resolution**: The tables were dumped and restored from scratch.
```

> **Detection**: We were informed by BuildOPS who got notified via their monitoring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Detection**: We were informed by BuildOPS who got notified via their monitoring.
```

## Lessons Learned
**What went well?**

> The rest of the migration except for those tables
> 
> **What went wrong?**
> 
> * The current way we deploy with migration does not log the progress of migrations or inform us about things happening in real time
> * We don't know about errors coming from the database if there are any unless somebody tells us
> * We did not communicate this migration with the BuildOPS in advance to warn them of any potential fallout
> 
> **Where we got lucky?**
> 
> Only four tables ended up being affected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rest of the migration except for those tables.

**What went wrong?**

* The current way we deploy with migration does not log the progress of migrations or inform us about things happening in real time.
* We don't know about errors coming from the database if there are any unless somebody tells us.
* We did not communicate this migration with the BuildOPS in advance to warn them of any potential fallout.

**Where we got lucky?**

Only four tables ended up being affected.
```

---
layout: post
title: "Post-mortem: Database Cluster Crashes"
category: deployments
---

## Downtime on the afternoon of 3rd of August

On 3. August, a few hours after a large migration performed within the maintenance window earlier that day, we experienced multiple downtimes while recovering from database inconsistencies.

**Date**: 03.08.2023 

**Impact**: Multiple downtimes throughout the day.

**Root Causes**: Our database cluster ran out of available space during a large schema/data migration ([#14597 - Migrate the remaining database tables and columns to utf8mb4](https://github.com/openSUSE/open-build-service/pull/14597))

**Trigger**: Morning deployment and migration from utf8mb3 to utf8mb4.

**Resolution**: The tables were dumped and restored from scratch.

**Detection**: Our database admins got notified via their monitoring.

## Lessons Learned
**What went well?**

* We learned about the database crash soon after it happened.

**What went wrong?**

> * The current way we deploy with migration does not log the progress of migrations or inform us about things happening in real time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The current way we deploy with migration does not log the progress of migrations or inform us about things happening in real time ([improvement card](https://trello.com/c/iQKJUUaS)).
```

---
layout: post
title: "Post-mortem: Database Cluster Crashes"
category: deployments
---

## Downtime on the afternoon of 3rd of August

> On 3. August, a few hours after a large migration performed within the maintenance window earlier that day, we got notified about database errors coming from some of the tables.

Reviewer 2: We usually tell people how it affected them so they can identify what we are talking about. Remember we write this for everyone else, not for us.

**Date**: 03.08.2023 

> **Impact**: Broken indexes on `project_log_entries`, `binary_releases`, `bs_request_actions` and `tokens` tables.

Reviewer 2: Impact for customers not for the involved software.

> **Root Causes**: Database cluster VM run out of available space. Generation of table indexes did not work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Root Causes**: Our database cluster ran out of available space during a large schema/data migration ([#14597 - Migrate the remaining database tables and columns to utf8mb4](https://github.com/openSUSE/open-build-service/pull/14597))
```

**Trigger**: Morning deployment and migration from utf8mb3 to utf8mb4.

**Resolution**: The tables were dumped and restored from scratch.

> **Detection**: We were informed by BuildOPS who got notified via their monitoring.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Detection**: Our database admins got notified via their monitoring.
```

## Lessons Learned
**What went well?**

> The rest of the migration except for those tables.

Reviewer 2: Not sure what you want to say? That the change we made was good?

Reviewer 2: Yeah but which table was affected or not had little to do with the migration right? It's a bits misleading, as if the migration would be the cause...

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't mention it at all. It has nothing really to do with the incident...

**What went wrong?**

> * The current way we deploy with migration does not log the progress of migrations or inform us about things happening in real time.

Reviewer 2: Where is the action item to change this?

Reviewer 2: SRE I would say https://trello.com/b/Qx7osByV

> * We don't know about errors coming from the database if there are any unless somebody tells us.

Reviewer 2: Not sure what you want to say with this. Can you explain?

Reviewer 2: Well, no wonder right? We don't maintain the database cluster :)

Reviewer 2: For sure not but you are capable of rewording :)

> * We did not communicate this migration with the BuildOPS in advance to warn them of any potential fallout.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* We did not communicate this migration with our database admins in advance to make them aware of potential fallout.
```

**Where we got lucky?**

* Only four tables ended up being affected.

> * There were people around who helped us in getting the database back to usable state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Our database admins where around to help us in getting the database back to usable state.
```

## Timeline (CEST)
- *09:03* Started the deployment with the migration
- *09:26* Ended the deployment
- *09:31* First recorded error in the index of `project_log_entries` table

> - *13:37* Database cluster crashes

Reviewer 2: Hm, how did we survive this gap between 9 and 1?

## Downtime on the afternoon of 3rd of August

On 3. August, a few hours after a large migration performed within the maintenance window earlier that day, we got notified about database errors coming from some of the tables.

**Date**: 03.08.2023 

> **Impact**: Broken indexes on `project_log_entries`, `binary_releases`, `bs_request_actions` and `tokens` tables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Impact**: Broken indexes on `project_log_entries`, `binary_releases`, `bs_request_actions` and `tokens` tables.
```

> **Root Causes**: Database cluster VM run out of available space. Generation of table indexes did not work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Root Causes**: Database cluster VM run out of available space. Generation of table indexes did not work.
```

Reviewer: Also, generation as in creation?
